so excited to be here. Uh this has been
such an incredible event. Um I feel like
so many ideas and connections like
already buzzing from hearing all the
talks and seeing all the pieces. Um I
want to talk today about extraordinary
science and what science might look like
uh if we take seriously some of these
conversations that we've been having
here at this event today. Uh so let me
see.
Nope.
Uh so back in 2013 uh I was in London
for SB 6.0 uh the sixth international
conference for synthetic biology. Uh one
of the keynotes there uh was by a
professor who was really well known for
designing very complex genetic pathways
in mamalian cells. And so in his
presentation uh he shared the details of
a new design of a genetic circuit uh
that was able to be activated in the
presence of dopamine in the blood. Uh so
you'll see uh in the in here up here
like in these designer cells which could
be encapsulated in this kind of uh
biompatible
uh material uh and then implanted into
the body of a mouse. Uh you would have
like the stimulus food, sex or drugs uh
would make dopamine. uh it would hit
that receptor um activate a sort of
cascade of biological processes inside
the cell and then activate the
transcription factor that was part of
this synthetic gene pathway. Um and that
transcription factor would turn on a
gene uh that would make uh that seap
molecule that's easy to to measure. Um
and so when you give uh cells cocaine uh
or mice cocaine uh you can see a boost
in that seap molecule. So you can see
that it's at in the hec 293 cells there.
And so uh in the paper that they
published uh they actually were able to
like rewire this pathway um with a
different you know this trigger this
dopamine trigger to a different
transcription factor uh and to a
different uh sort of output uh in this
case a peptide that's able to lower
blood pressure. And so they write in
their paper uh hypertensive animals
treated with this device which produces
a clinically licensed anti-hypertensive
peptide had their high blood pressure
corrected when exposed to sexual
arousal.
Uh okay. So wow. Uh and so like I I saw
this talk and I was like what is
happening? Like what does like is do
they really think that this is like a
medical device? like, can you imagine
what it would be like to take your
medicine if this if you had this in your
body? Like, what kind of a world are
they imagining? Right? And so, as we
sort of spilled out of the auditorium
onto the steps outside of the um outside
of the conference center, I was talking
to my colleagues like, "Oh my god, like
what are they doing? This is crazy." Uh
like it's and and um so I my colleague
uh was like, "No, no, no. It's great.
Like if you had this device, you could
know when you were really happy.
I was speechless all over again.
What do you mean really happy? Like do
you really need a spectr photoometer and
measuring SEAP to know if you're happy?
Uh like can you like again what's the
process there? Like oh excuse me I have
to go run a little bit of an assay to
know if that felt good. Uh and so I I
like in that moment and again like this
is no more than a decade later. I still
remember it really vividly. um in this
moment like where I I I sort of came to
understand something about the the
scientific mindset um and how much I
myself had been sort of transformed uh
through an experience of hanging out
with artists mostly uh uh because I too
uh could I could relate to this
personally uh because I once had
scientist brainworms too. Uh uh the real
world is really messy. Uh feelings and
emotions are complicated. They're really
uncertain. Like scientists like we want
answers. We want a number. Uh right?
Like I want I don't I want to be right
or wrong. And like I loved science um
because that was possible. Like I wanted
to be able to see things that they as
they really were uh down to that kind of
molecular level. Um, I wanted those
numbers to grab on to. I wanted to do
things that were rational. Uh, to follow
facts, not feelings. Uh, and so I became
a scientist. Uh, but, uh, my experience
of actually training to become a
scientist and working in a lab very
quickly disabused me of the notion that
scientists are purely rational.
uh becoming a scientist meant
encountering over and over and over
again. These contradictions between this
cultural ideal or story of what a
scientist is on the one hand and on the
other hand the reality of that we are
indeed people with bodies situated in
time space culture and society and
struggling for credibility and
authority.
uh even at this very personal and
emotional level, we do indeed have
bodies and minds and we do feel emotions
and when we're working in the lab and
especially when we're struggling with
that credibility. Um we feel a lot of
things, right? We get confused, we get
surprised, we get frustrated, we get
angry, we get excited, uh and maybe even
happy. Um and working as a scientist is
not at all like what I thought it would
be, right? It's not at all like being in
school and being good at answering
multiple choice questions or doing
problem sets, right? Um it's actually
going where there are no answers into
places and problems where things are
uncertain. Uh where you need to find an
explanation and often fail at trying to
do it. And so those feelings and
uncertainties uh actually like can cause
a real identity crisis for young
scientists. uh when scientists are
supposed to be rational and not
emotional like and all of a sudden
you're having all of these feelings like
I guess I'm not cut out to be a
scientist. Um, and if scientists are
supposed to be these kind of
dispassionate observers and like kind of
closing themselves off to all of these
impacts or downstream issues, like if
you care about those things or ask about
them or feel things about them, again,
like maybe you you feel like you're not
cut out to really be a scientist.
Uh I feel very lucky to have h been uh a
scientist going through that my own
identity crisis with a lot of support uh
through my friends, partners and uh
partner and uh uh mentors who were able
to like help me through those emotions
uh and and see how we I might be able to
be in a scientific world um but care
about those kinds of things or or have
emotions. Um so uh my now husband
recommended books like uh Stephen
Shapen's book. Um and I I had this
really wonderful experience um in my
department where I did my PhD. Um there
was a weekly chalk talk seminar. Um and
the visiting professor Yuriel who was a
systems biologist um who studies like
the behavior of of networks inside of
cells. Um he was actually also really
interested and as a mentor like what
happens to scientists, young scientists
who are going through this process of
encountering uncertainty. Uh how can we
help them through those kinds of
experiences? Um and and he did something
very interesting for his chalk talk. Um
gosh uh he brought Evelyn Fox Keller um
who is a historian and philosopher of
science um from MIT. Um she uh she was
uh she recently passed away but she was
a a biophysicist by training and then
spent a lot of her her time as a
philosopher and historian thinking about
the role of gender in science. Um and
what was really interesting and
important about the way that she thought
about gender in science was that again
it's not about women in science or like
the jobs for women or opportunities or
lack thereof. Um, it was actually about
like the concept of gender and like the
way that gender shapes the way we think
about who we are and what we can do and
that we map these ideas about
rationality and what it means to be a
scientist onto a particular gender. Um,
and then we separate out the the things
that you're not supposed to be when
you're a scientist. So these ideas about
like who and what is rational, uh what
kinds of things we are, who who and who
we can be is wrapped up in all of these
kinds of cultural ideas. And and so
Evelyn Fox Keller really uh sort of
untangles that and reflects on it in her
work. Um and when she came to visit the
um uh to visit our department, it helped
me again like start to see things in a
different way. What would it look like
for us to be able to be fully human? uh
to be able to have both our reasoning
and our emotional lives together um and
to bring it all into the work that we do
as scientists. Um
uh then I a lot of people have been
talking about have brought up Donna
Heroay who's wonderful and so her
writing too, right? How do we see from
our own situated points of view um as
scientists but work together towards
solving problems? Um and uh also uh
another scholar that was really again
like guided me through this pro uh
crisis of mine um was Isabelle Stangers
who's another philosopher who writes
about again another science is possible.
How can we change the system that forces
us as scientists to stay ignorant of
these bigger questions um and focus on
everinccreasing and increasingly frantic
work uh chasing funding and papers on an
increasingly narrow set of questions.
Um so
with armed with my books and my friends
and conversations I like kept going uh I
kept going in my training um and uh I
wanted to think about um uh yeah h how I
might do it uh differently. And so the
next sort of area again like where where
we as scientists have this kind of like
aggression uh towards like mess uh and
an allergy towards things that are
complicated are with biology itself. Uh
so as a synthetic biologist, the field
that I was working in, um the field was
really created by engineers who came to
biology seeking a medium of engineering
and design that could grow, heal, adapt
and build these incredible structure
structures at the nano scale. Um and and
they came to try to do that to do
experiments to design these kinds of
systems and it was a horrible mess,
right? like it's so hard to work with
biology. Um, biology is all exceptions
that prove the rule. Uh, it's all these
tangles and messes of interconnected
systems. Um, and the practice of
actually working with biology, of being
in the lab, um, is a series of all of
these sort of precisely choreographed,
really fussy and fiddly and custom
processes. Doesn't really feel like
engineering. Um, it's more art than
science.
Um and so synthetic biologists really
sort of started with that as the problem
that they wanted to fix. Right? So my my
colleagues and mentors and friends and
people who I do still love dearly. Um
they would say things like the best way
to deal with complexity is to get rid of
it. Um or we must escape the tyranny of
evolution. Uh or more simply we must
make biology easier to engineer. Um and
so we all kind of came to biology for
its power and its potential. But we came
with this a desire to control a kind of
a aggression about why it's so messy. It
just shouldn't be that way. Um and uh
they really wanted to kind of turn it
from this artisal craft um of pipetting
into something more like a real
engineering discipline. There's that
real again. Um and so again I turned to
my philosophers and the weirdos of 20th
century science. Um Evelyn Fox Keller uh
again she wrote this a wonderful
biography of the geneticist Barbara
Mcccleintoch. Um Barbara Mcccleintoch
discovered this really a really
interesting process of genes being able
to jump in the genome um from one spot
to another. Um and she didn't do that
through a kind of precise kind of
controlbased experimental protocol where
she sort of took apart the cell. Uh but
in fact a very like almost literally
mystical kind of relationship that she
had with the corn. um a kind of
resonance and communion um what Evelyn
Fox Keller describes as a feeling for
the organism. So how might we speak
differently with these living organisms
who are so different from us? Um how
could we listen to them and understand
how they grow and change? How can we ask
them if they want to work with us to
make something new? Um, and if we listen
to biology differently through different
approaches and different aesthetics and
different frames, what might we hear? Um
Lynn Margulus uh was a microbiologist um
who looked at evolution and saw not only
a record of constant competition and
aggression and domination um in a fight
for the survival of the fittest
individual um but also how cooperation,
community, and symbiosis were part of
our biological legacy.
She was the first person to realize that
our own cells were actually made
possible through a symbiotic
relationship between tiny bacteria that
one day started living inside of bigger
and bigger cells um and became our
mitochondria, the powerhouse of the
cell. Uh and indeed some of these these
biggest leaps in evolution that enabled
the kind of complex beauty of our own
bodies uh were made possible only
through a kind of symbiotic relationship
and exchange rather than a kind of yeah
again like incremental uh
incrementalism.
Um and so learning about this kind of
work I became obsessed with symbiosis um
and how endo symbiosis might offer us a
very different design tool for
bioengineering. Um the lab that I was
working in um at the time uh was working
on engineering bacteria to produce
bofuels um among many other things. Uh
and one of the projects that they were
working on was to engineer a species of
photosynthetic bacteria that could
secrete sugars into the environment. Um
the idea being that you could go from
sunlight to sugar um to directly feed a
bacteria that was making a fuel without
competing with food crops. Um but a
photosynthetic bacteria that secretes
sugar sounds a lot like a chloroplast.
Um the endo symbiotic organel that makes
plants able to photosynthesize. Uh could
we make photosynthetic animals? We
wondered. Um
so uh we tried. Um this is a this is a
zebra fish uh just a few days after uh
after the egg uh hatched or no way yeah
it's after development started uh
fertilization. Um and zebra fish are
super interesting um because they're a
kind of common model organism in science
and they're also see-through uh for the
first couple weeks of development. Um so
you could get light light through their
bodies uh to uh see if maybe you could
get photosynthesis to start happening.
Um and so those red dots are actually
the photosynthetic bacteria um that are
uh they they glow red in uh under a
fluorescent microscope because they they
can interact with light, right? Uh and
so they they they reflect this sort of
red light back to you um on the
microscope. And so we could sort of see
them and track them. And what was most
interesting about this project is that
nothing happened. Uh it it wasn't really
like photosynthetic. it didn't like you
can't survive with just the amount of
sugar that this made. Um, but the fact
that nothing happened like still to me
like opened up this really interesting
possibility that like other worlds are
possible. Uh, other kinds of design and
interaction like other ways of
connecting with other organisms and and
doing something different. Um,
uh,
and uh, okay, here we go. Then I'm gonna
find myself in my notes. Uh so at this
point too in my PhD I had like yeah read
all those weirdo books. Uh and I started
hanging out with these cool artists. Uh
and the artists um brought to me a
really interesting opportunity. Um
because they came to synthetic biology
with a similar kind of question, right?
Like what would it be if this was a
medium for design? What what kinds of
questions or or or things could we ask
or do? um the artists that I wanted uh
to connect with too, but they they had a
very very different way of seeing and
knowing and communicating um of
understanding how living things work and
our relationship to them um and in a
time of like an everinccreasing power to
engineered DNA. Um and so for me the
chance to like work with artists offered
me another way to break out of that
mindset uh of the scientists of this
sort of need to control to dominate um
and to see if there are again other ways
possible of interacting with with bodies
uh with living things um and that maybe
science can indeed be more art than
science. And so uh I was really lucky to
get uh paired with an artist in a
project funded by the NSF uh that was
connecting artists and scientists to
explore the ethical and aesthetic
dimensions of synthetic biology. Uh my
partner was the brilliant smell artist
Sisle Tlas. Um and our explorations uh
together brought us to the stinkiest
depths and crevices uh where microbes
make communities. Uh
let's see
armpits. Uh so as we did our research um
and looking uh reading a lot of papers
about the communities of bacteria on the
skin um and how they can like eat the
oils on our skin to make these really
interesting odors um and how like our
hormones and bodies are sort of
connected to these species and how they
change over time. We also saw that many
of those same species that were on our
skin were actually involved in cheese
making. Um, and so we were like, huh,
like what if we made our own cheese? Uh,
uh, so, so this is a cheese that we
made, uh, using bacteria that we
collected from the skin of Hans Olber's
nose. Um, he sent us a swab for like
right here. Um, we also made, uh, one
using bacteria from Michael Pollen's
belly button. It was like a nice little
farmer's cheese. Um, we made one from
Olaf for Elias's tears, um, which was
really, uh, special. Um, and and also
the toes of a prominent cheese
microbiologist. That one was really
stinky. Um, and so it was a really
interesting project because there is
this really incredibly rich history like
that is kind of bridges science and like
deep history and anthropology. um that
connects the diverse ecology of our
bodies, um the cultural history of
fermented foods and our ideas about what
is the right and wrong thing to eat. Um
and like I think these questions about
like where and how microbes will be part
of our technologies, part of our food,
how we manufacture things, how we make
and feed food to feed billions of
people, um all again like are are
constantly coming up in this world of
sort of science and technology and and
where we meet society. And so in these
cheeses, we had this really interesting
model organisms that we could use to
study microbial interactions and
molecular expressions of diverse
ecologies um but also these really
interesting portraits that asked us to
look at ourselves not as individuals but
as communities like part of these
histories um and and with each other. Uh
my dissertation committee said it's a
bit phenomenological
and and that was about it. Um so uh
let's see um so okay we talked about
emotions um we talked about biology um
now uh there's a third kind of allergy
to messiness uh that scientists have and
that is with politics um to scientists
and sort of many and like the vernacular
kind of we use politics as a catch-all
word um for all of the messy people
stuff uh where we're not just dealing
with our own emotions uh but everyone
else's too, Right? Uh and so we don't
want to deal with that, right? Like
that's why I go be a scientist. Like I
want to go in the lab. I don't want to
deal with that stuff. But of course
there's there's a well first of all
there's other people in the lab. Uh but
more than that, right? Like what's the
first thing you have to do when you
start your your science project? You
have to ask the government for money. Uh
right? And so like you have to have a
question that's relevant to funding
agencies and and that are uh you know
that are funded via congressional
appropriations. um you have to do work
and like write it up in a way that seems
novel and relevant and reasonable to
peer reviewers um who themselves are
worrying about their own status and
credibility and and like how they're
going to make their their lab work and
and be funded in the future. Um and like
at the same time too the work that we do
like often has these like broader
implications, right? like we're doing
science because we want to cure disease,
address an environmental issue, make
something new, do something important,
like be out in the world, right? Um we
want to have something that we do that
can be readily translated out into
industry or medicine. Um, and then when
it like leaves the lab, right, like and
it becomes something that like is part
of industry or medicine, like it has to
be something that people want uh and
like want to buy and like. Um, and uh
unfortunately the the stuff that
synthetic biologists make are GMOs uh
and stuff like mRNA vaccines, right? Um,
and so when you think when when people
in my field sort of thought about like
what happens downstream, what happens
when this technology goes out? What
happens when we're trying to actually
solve problems in the real world? Um,
you immediately kind of crash into like,
oh, but everyone hates it because
they're stupid. Um, and that doesn't
work unfortunately. That's a very again
like that's that same kind of like
aggression. Um and so like effectively
the the attitude that scientists have
towards like uh any kinds of questions
on like what's it for, who's it for, who
benefits, to what end, like how is it
part of these broader systems? Again,
like what what are the kind of like
economic or political or social
implications? Like what are kinds of
questions are you asking? What kinds of
questions can you see from your
perspective? Um they sort of would say,
"Back off, man. I'm a scientist." Um
right? So you should just believe the
facts. stop complaining. Um, and so like
it was that that that sort of same kind
of attitude was even turned against me
when I'd be like, "Ah, guys, we're
working on biouels. Have you like
thought about the politics of climate
change?" They're like, "No, don't think
about that." Like we can't deal with
that. That's too big. We can only deal
with self. Um, like that's what we can
do in the lab. And again, it doesn't
come it's it's not like a I'm not saying
all this to like be mean again like or
or say that they're bad. I think I do
genuinely like want to sort of open up a
conversation like right like what is the
identity of the scientist? Why are we
pulling why do we constantly pull back?
Like can there be another way for
scientists to be in the world? Um and so
like that uh um so where where am I
going with the the next slide? Okay. So
when it comes again to GMOs like we were
working um uh in in synthetic biology
we're going to make a lot of genetically
engineered organisms. Um some of them
might be out in the environment, some of
them be might be used to make food
ingredients. Um at the same time again
like when we when that s same attitude
of like back off like you you can't
complain, you shouldn't complain. Um was
sort of being like codified into the
laws around like how we would market our
technologies effectively. Um uh at the
time, this was about 10 years ago, there
was um uh some individual states in the
US had been uh putting up forth their
own legislation like you have to label
GMOs. Um if you have a GMO ingredient or
or crop in the food, like you need to
put a label that says it's been
engineered. Um and so like that then
actually sort of triggered like okay,
there actually should be a federal
answer to this rather than companies
having to make 50 different labels with
all the different regulations. And so
there was there was law kind of going
through the Senate. Um and again the
scientists hated this. They were like
and the companies right like no it's all
the same. Like you should just like it.
We don't have to label it. It's the same
thing. Um and this is like the worst
possible kind of marketing, right? Like
I made them seem like unbelievably evil.
Um and again it came from like a place
of like I do like they I believe in the
products we're doing. I did we did all
this testing. We did like we we did all
this work to make sure that they're safe
and that they're exactly the same, you
know, like by the time they get to you,
etc., etc., etc., right? Um like but
they but they ma it made them seem bad,
right? Like what could they possibly be
hiding? Why don't they want to tell me,
right? Like if you like science so much,
like why don't you let me do my own
reasoning and think about what I want to
eat and why, right? And so I began a
campaign to help scientists uh
reformulate their relationship to the
public. um not one that's about sort of
like an I got to teach them how about
the science so that they believe me um
but one where we can actually like open
ourselves up um to the broader world um
and through that opening um be able to
have a conversation that might look a
little bit different might be
transformative and so the first step was
even saying like as a company so this is
um an op-ed written by the CEO of the
company I worked at like we advocated
for GMO labeling like hey of course we
want you to know what it is like we want
to have a conversation about it. This is
great. Like we do this because we
believe that this is we we make good
things. We want to do good things. We do
it for these reasons. Um and we want you
to be part of the conversation. Um uh
this was uh the first time I got hate
mail from scientists. Uh so like a a
Nobel Prize winner sent us like really
mean email about how bad and dumb we
were for wanting to uh to share
information about our our our
technology. Uh, and so I learned a lot
from doing this. Um, but ultimately the
law did change. Um, and this has been so
now in your grocery store you can find
this label on a lot of different kinds
of foods that have um bio-engineered
ingredients in them. Um, uh, and then
the the intervention that we did also
was we made a bunch of these uh these
stickers um and and buttons and we
handed them out at a lot of conferences.
Um, and again the point here is not like
you should love GMOs. Uh, it's like,
well, I make GMOs for a living. Like, I
do like love the projects I'm doing. I
love the things I'm doing. Like, what
could it look like for it to be lovable,
right? And so having these kinds of
objects again where like they they
weren't shutting down a conversation.
They actually like really did open up
really interesting conversations for
folks who are like, you know, have
conversations in line at the grocery
store. Like I had amazing conversations
with folks on planes like um sitting
next to like having like like what what
do you think? Like what are your values?
This is what I'm trying to do. This is
how I see that might be like what's
what's going on here with all of this
stuff. Um and so one of the most fun so
this is this is a very different sort of
interaction again like not the hate mail
version but I was having a conversation
with somebody like an executive at a
major like agricultural conglomerate.
Um, and eventually they were like, "Oh,
like they don't hate GMOs, they hate
us." Um,
uh, and so like changing that
conversation around science and like who
it's for and why we do it and what it
matters like and and being able to have
these kind of like moments of connection
with people like actually like really
does tr it can be transformative. Um, it
can it can really shift us out of that
kind of like mindset of of the
scientists. Um and so like uh changing
ourselves like and changing the way that
we do science like was also about sort
of changing the culture and and like
making spaces for connection and
collaboration and creativity. Um and
this was some of like the most fun stuff
I got to do when I worked at GKO um was
really build a team that was able to
sort of open up those spaces like you
know we could create a lot of kind of
events. We created new kinds of media.
We built this magazine Grow by GKO. um
again new kinds of storytelling um and
uh like places for for conversation. Um
we had a creative residency where we
could bring in artists and designers
into the lab um and connect with our
teams and build their own projects.
That's work by Andrea Ling who's a
really amazing like uh sculptor and
working with new biioaterials. Um we
also worked with a agency a design
studio called Faber Futures run by
Natsai Chza. Um she collaborated with us
on the creative residency and we also
built this store uh normal phenomena of
life again a place to prototype new ways
of living with new kinds of technologies
and tools and and biioaterialbased
products. Um we also did uh we did
resurrected the smell of an extinct
flower. That's the bottom right. Um and
we explored with kind of different ways
of of building like corporate governance
and conversations about how and why we
do things and and how to build kind of
our our interactions. Um we built a team
called caring uh and and and was able to
do a lot of really interesting kind of
work thinking through again how do we do
science like in uh in the real world. Um
and so uh I'm going to bring up more
20th century philosophers. Um uh in the
structure of scientific revolutions um
Thomas outlines his view uh on how
different kinds of scientific questions
become askable um and how new approaches
become acceptable. Um, like Lin
Margulus' view of evolution, um,
didn't think that the slow accumulation
of mutations in scientific explanations
was enough to explain the massive shifts
that could occur in scientific history
that he saw throughout uh, scientific
thinking that he saw throughout history.
Um instead he really theorized that
science goes through these periods of
normal science where new facts and
explanations do get added with kind of
limited controversy and like sort of
normal amounts of politics and and like
jockeying for position. Um but those
kinds of normal periods are punctuated
by periods of crisis um where more and
more of the observations that scientists
are seeing from their data in their
experiments in their interactions um are
disagreeing with the established
theories. And so in these times of
crisis, uh, writes about how normal
science like just doesn't cut it, right?
It's a time for extraordinary science.
You can qu questions that were too far
out of the norm, too wacky um all of a
sudden might become inbounds. They're
sort of acceptable to be asked um and
explored as potential ways to explain
what was happening. Um and the
structures of how people organize or
fund or communicate research also
becomes a little bit looser. Um as a
community seeks out new paradigms, new
people, new ways of thinking.
Um science today I would argue is in
crisis. Uh it's not a crisis of any like
kind of particular worldview or
particular way of seeing things. It's
not like you know whatever Tommy or
whatever that writes about, right?
Um it's about the sort of meta
scientific structure of science, right?
About the infrastructures and the social
contract of science. This is especially
in the United States right now. Um and
so like the this social contract that
has governed how we do science for
nearly a century is really starting to
come apart at the seams, right? So it's
an infrastructure that was built on this
idea um that uh yeah like that was built
like with and together that with that
idea of like we have to separate
ourselves from the world. We have to
separate ourselves from our like human
foibless and our emotions. We have to
sort of be less and less human in order
to do better and better science. Um and
so that was sort of structurally enabled
by the way that we sort of think about
like basic science happens over here and
we fund that publicly. Um, and then that
that organization is happens as kind of
autonomously and self-governing and we
hope eventually like some good stuff
will come out of it and somebody will
exploit it and make a lot of money out
of it and we'll all get pills of some
kind, right? Um, and so today like
there's just like crisis after crisis in
that model, right? like we're there's a
lot of research now about how like the
amount of effort and money that it takes
um like on the on the basic science side
to get those pills on the other end like
keeps going up like we have to do more
and more and more and more work at more
and more and more cost um to get the
same kind of benefit at the end um
there's less and less impact and stuff
that we are benefiting from um the
scientists themselves are also miserable
right like I think again that sense of
like the emot emotions that we feel as
scientists like are you know are awful
right so there's a lot of debate
internally right like these institutions
aren't working for us it's too slow it's
pen it's full of bureaucracy um
everything is about sort of these
incremental like bean counting and
numbers and metrics and not about the
ideas that matter um uh scientific
papers themselves right like how do we
publish them who's peer reviewing like
do they replicate does anyone even read
them in the first place even if they
were to replicate, right? Um I think all
of these things are are like really
again like putting a lot of stress and
pressure on this on on this institutions
of science and for a long time again
like we were able to kind of say keep
pushing it away pushing it away. Well,
the status quo works. Look, we still
have things. We we do have mRNA
vaccines. We do have all of these
amazing things, right? Like it's
working. Like let's let's not like rock
the boat. So again, like we could we
could resist the call to the uh of the
paradigm shift um and sort of keep going
with the normal stuff. Um but now we
have a very different government and a
government that's saying nope, we're not
going to fund it anymore. Um and so like
and we're going to cut it all and and
it's just gone, right? So like there's
that that that system is dis
disintegrating. Um and like everything
is kind of in chaos right now. And so
like at the same time like we still have
really urgent problems and things that
we and like questions about how how to
do things and what science could be and
where we could go and things questions
about health and food um and in the
environment and climate change and all
of these things that could benefit from
new ways of seeing things, new kinds of
technology. Um but science is just a
small part of what any one of of those
problems, right? um it's not enough uh
to say back off. I'm a scientist and let
the scientists handle it because the the
answers to those kinds of questions are
too big. Um they're too messy. There's
too much of our values and and
complicated things in them. And so the
more uh indeed the more we push on that,
the more we say, "Hey, back off. I'm a
scientist." The less and less trust we
have, the less and less opportunity we
have to actually connect and try to do
things together and figure stuff out
together. Um and so uh here's my this is
my last philosopher. Um this is Jerome
Ravitz. Um he talked about um in the
1990s this concept of postnormal
science. Um so again like on this kind
of graph of like on the one hand uh like
very high urgency high stakes questions
and problems where like we have to find
an answer we have to do things. Um uh on
on this axis um and then the other axis
we have like high uncertainty. we don't
know enough to be able to sort of
definitively say this is the right
number. This is how it really is. Um
there may not be a definitive answer
because there are there are things that
are sort of connected and how again our
politics ourselves how we do things um
our values and the choices might be
different for different people. Um and
so in time in in situations where you
have very high uncertainty and very high
urgency and high stakes which is a lot
of things right now like the normal kind
of science doesn't cut it. Um uh
I think a lot of us as scientists too
again like when that sort of happens
that's that that feeling they're like
don't worry about that right like pull
they pull back they pull back down to
the corner. Well, we can we can figure
out like the right whatever protocol to
do whatever like right like those are
things that we can control and so we
sort of pull back. Um but what might it
look like to sort of go forward? Um so
uh sorry this is anyway uh so okay I'm
going to close uh with a proposal. Uh
perhaps we need an institute uh for
post-normal science. um a place where
people who might find themselves like
sort of that that disillusioned uh
having that identity crisis wanting to
leave science pulling away maybe a place
where they want to keep exploring um
maybe it's a place where scientists who
uh don't pull back away from those tough
questions away from their humanity uh
but lean in and try to figure out a
different way of exploring the world
together um as I've been thinking about
this as a proposal and a concept um it's
been hard to actually like describe what
exactly it would be and what we would do
and again like those questions of like
well what should the incentives be like
what somebody asked me what the KPIs
would be and I I think that's the wrong
way of thinking about it um because in
fact like the point is that for these
kinds of areas of uncertainty when we
are jumping off into some new thing and
a new way of working there is no
playbook um there is no one method for
all of science science um and certainly
not one way for all of not one way for
science to be in the world and for
scientists to be in the world. Um but we
do urgently need a place to explore um
and practice extraordinary kinds of
scientist science um where maybe we can
have emotions too and reason uh where
everything can be uh where we can
develop our feelings for the organism uh
and the algorithm uh where art and
science can play together uh and where
we can explore different ways of being
uh so I would love to be able to explore
this with you You can email I made this
website today uh post
postnormalcience.org
and if you have ideas or things that you
think that we should study at the
institute um uh and maybe I would love
to uh see you there someday soon. Thank
you so much.